GNU Gama is developed and tested under GNU/Linux.  A static library
@code{libgama.lib} and executables are build in folders @code{lib} and
@code{bin}.  You can compile Gama easily yourself if you download the
sources from a FTP server.  The preferred way is to have @code{expat}
XML parser installed on your system, if not, GNU Gama will be build
with internally stored @code{expat} older source codes version 1.1.

Change to the directory of Gama project and issue the
following commands at the shell prompt

@example
$ ./configure
$ make
@end example

@noindent
For GNU Gama test suite run

@example
$ make check
@end example

@noindent If the script @code{configure} is not available (which is the
case when you download source codes from a git server), you have to
generate it using auxiliary script @code{autogen.sh}.  To compile and
build all binaries. Run

@example
$ ./configure [--bindir=DIR --infodir=DIR]
$ make install
@end example

@noindent if you want also to install the binaries. You can use configure 
parameters if you need to change directories where user executables
and info documentation should be installed.

Typically, if you want to download (@pxref{Download}) and compile sources,
you will run following commands:
@example
$ git clone git://git.sv.gnu.org/gama.git gama
$ cd gama
$ ./autogen.sh
$ ./configure
$ make
@end example
You should have @code{expat} XML parser and SQLite library already installed
on your system.
For example to be able to compile Gama on Ubuntu 10.04 you have to install
following packages:
@example
make doxygen git automake autoconf libexpat1-dev libsqlite3-dev
@end example

To compile user documentation in various formats (PDF, HTML, @dots{}) run
the following commands

@example
$ cd doc/
$ make download-gendocs.sh
$ make run-gendocs.sh
@end example

@noindent
The documentation should be in @code{doc/manual} directory.
To compile API documentation run

@example
$ doxygen
@end example

@noindent
in your @code{gama} directory.
Doxygen output will be in the @code{doxygen} directory.


@menu
* CMake::
* Precompiled binaries for Windows::
@end menu

@node       CMake
@subsection CMake
@cindex     CMake

Alternatively you can use CMake to generate makefiles for Unix,
Windows, Mac OS X, OS/2, MSVC, Cygwin, MinGW or Xcode. Configuration
file @code{CMakeLists.txt} is available from the root distribution
directory. For example to build @code{gama-local} binary for Linux run

@example
$ mkdir build
$ cd build
$ cmake ..
$ make
@end example

@noindent
where @code{build} is an arbitrary directory name for
@emph{out-of-place build}.

@node       Precompiled binaries for Windows
@subsection Precompiled binaries for Windows
@cindex     Windows, precompiled binaries 


GNU Gama builds for Windows are available from

@center @uref{https://sourceforge.net/projects/gnu-gama-builds/}

