@comment gama-local-test-suite.texi

@c @chapter Gama-local test suite

@noindent
GNU Gama comes with a set of tests that provides @code{gama-local} test suite.
To run the test suite, go to the top-level Gama directory and type

@example
$ make check
@end example

You should see the names of the test suite files as they are
processed, any other output indicates some problem. The output might
be for example example this

@example
Entering directory '/home/cepek//gama/tests/gama-local'
PASS: gama-local-version
PASS: gama-local-adjustment
PASS: gama-local-algorithms
PASS: gama-local-xml-xml
PASS: gama-local-html
PASS: gama-local-equivalents
PASS: gama-local-xml-results
PASS: gama-local-parameters
PASS: gama-local-updated-xml
PASS: gama-local-sqlite-reader
PASS: xmllint-gama-local-xsd
PASS: xmllint-gama-local-adjustment-xsd
========================================================================
Testsuite summary for gama @value{VERSION}
========================================================================
# TOTAL: 12
# PASS:  12
# SKIP:  0
# XFAIL: 0
# FAIL:  0
# XPASS: 0
# ERROR: 0
========================================================================
@end example


Number of tests vary according to the configuration of your
system. Tests that are always present are

@example
gama-local-version
gama-local-adjustment
gama-local-algorithms
gama-local-xml-xml
gama-local-html
gama-local-equivalents
gama-local-xml-results
gama-local-parameters
gama-local-updated-xml
@end example

Optional tests are

@example
gama-local-sqlite-reader
xmllint-gama-local-xsd
xmllint-gama-local-adjustment-xsd
@end example

which are included only if sqlite3 database support libraries and/or
@code{xmllint} program are installed.



@menu
* Internal organisation::  Internal organisation
@end menu

@node    Internal organisation
@section Internal organisation

Gama-local tests are implemented as shell scripts that are stored in
@code{gama/tests/gama-local} directory. The scripts are generated from
corresponding @code{.in} files which are stored in
@code{gama/tests/gama-local/script} directory where are also stored
helper C++ programs called by the testing suite scripts.  Generating
scripts and the build of helper programs is controlled from
@code{gama/tests/gama-local/Makefile.am}, where a list of testing data
files is also defined.

In @code{gama/tests/gama-local} directory are also stored detail
@code{.log}  files for all tests together with corresponging
@code{.trs} (as in @b{T}est @b{R}e@b{S}ults) files.

All files generated by the test suite are stored in
@code{gama/tests/gama-local/script/@value{VERSION}} (thus generated
files from different versions are not overwritten).

To run selected test individually, go to the directory
@code{gama/tests/gama-local} and start the test manually

@example
$ cd gama/tests/gama-local
$ ./@i{test-name}
@end example
