GNU Gama is a project dedicated to adjustment of geodetic networks.
It is intended for use with traditional geodetic surveyings which are
still used and needed in special measurements (e.g., underground or
high precision engineering measurements) where the Global Positioning
System (GPS) cannot be used.

In general, surveying is the technique and science of accurately
determining the terrestrial or three-dimensional spatial position of
points and the distances and angles between them.@footnote{Wikipedia,
@uref{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Surveying}}  

Adjustment is a technical term traditionally used by geodesists and
surveyors which simply means ``application of the least squares method to
process the over-determined system of measurements'' (statistical
methods other than least squares are used sometimes but are not common). In
other words, we have more observations than needed and we are trying to
get the best estimate for adjusted observations and/or coordinates.

@dfn{Adjustment of geodetic networks} means that we have a set of
points with given coordinates coordinates of some points and a set of
observations among them. What is typical of adjustment of special
geodetic measurements is that the resulting linearised system might be
singular (we can have a network with no fixed points) and we are not
only interested in the values of `adjusted parameters and
observations' but also in the estimates of their covariances. This is
what Gama does.

Gama was originally inspired by Fortran system Geodet/PC (1990)
designed by Frantisek Charamza. The GNU Gama project started
at the department of mapping and cartography, faculty of Civil
Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague (CTU) about 1998 and
its name is an acronym for @emph{geodesy and mapping}.  It was
presented to a wider public for the first time at FIG Working Week 2000
in Prague and then at FIG Workshop and Seminar at HUT Helsinki in
2001.

The GNU Gama home page is

            @center   @uref{http://www.gnu.org/software/gama/}

@noindent and the project is hosted on

            @center   @uref{http://savannah.gnu.org/git/?group=gama}

GNU Gama is released under the GNU General Public License and is based
on a C++ library of geodetic classes and functions and a small C++
template matrix library @code{matvec}. For parsing XML documents GNU
Gama calls the @code{expat} parser version 1.1, written by James
Clark. The @code{expat} parser is not part of the GNU Gama project,
and is simply used by GNU Gama.

Adjustment in local Cartesian coordinate systems is fully supported
by a command-line program @code{gama-local} that adjusts geodetic
(free) networks of observed distances, directions, angles, height
differences, 3D vectors and observed coordinates (coordinates with
given variance-covariance matrix).  Adjustment in global coordinate
systems is supported only partly as a @code{gama-g3} program.

