Program @code{gama-local} is a simple command line tool for adjustment
of geodetic @emph{free networks.} It is available for GNU Linux (the
main platform on which project GNU Gama is being developed) or for MS
Windows (tested with Borland compiler from Borland free command line
tools and with Microsoft Visual C++ compiler; support for Windows
platform is currently limited to maintaing compatibility with the two
mentioned compilers).


Program @code{gama-local} reads input data in XML format (@ref{XML
input data format for gama-local}) and prints adjustment results into
ASCII text file. If output file name is not given, input file name
with extension@code{.txt} is used.
@c
If development files for Sqlite3 (package @code{libsqlite3-dev}) are
installed during the build, @code{gama-local} also supports reading
adjustment input data from an sqlite3 database.
@c
If run without arguments @code{gama-local}
prints a short help

@example
$ ./gama-local

Adjustment of local geodetic network        version: @value{VERSION} / GNU g++
************************************
http://www.gnu.org/software/gama/

Usage: gama-local  input.xml  [options]
       gama-local  input.xml  --sqlitedb sqlite.db  --configuration name  [options]
       gama-local  --sqlitedb sqlite.db  --configuration name  [options]
       gama-local  --sqlitedb sqlite.db  --readonly-configuration name  [options]

Options:

--algorithm  svd | gso | cholesky | envelope
--language   en | ca | cz | du | es | fi | fr | hu | ru | ua | zh
--encoding   utf-8 | iso-8859-2 | iso-8859-2-flat | cp-1250 | cp-1251
--angles     400 | 360
--latitude   <latitude>
--ellipsoid  <ellipsoid name>
--text       adjustment_results.txt
--html       adjustment_results.html
--xml        adjustment_results.xml
--svg        network_configuration.svg
--cov-band   covariance matrix of adjusted parameters in XML output
             n  = -1  for full covariance matrix (implicit value)
             n >=  0  covariances are computed only for bandwidth n
--version
--help
@end example

@noindent
Program @code{gama-local} version is followed by information on
compiler used to build the program (apart from GNU @code{g++}
compiler, two other possibilities are @code{bcc} and @code{msc} for
Borland and Microsoft compilers respectively, when build under
Microsoft Windows).


Option @code{--algorithm} enables to select numerical method used for
solution of the adjustment. Implicitly is used Singular Value
Decomposition (@code{svd}), alternatively user can decide for block
matrix algorithm GSO by Frantisek Charamza, based on Gram-Schmidt
orthogonalization. In both these cases, project equations are solved directly
without forming @emph{normal equations}.  Third possibility is to
select Cholesky decomposition of semidefinite matrix of normal
equations (@code{cholesky}).

Option @code{--language} selects language used in output protocol. For
example, if run with option @code{--language cz}, @code{gama-local}
prints output results in Czech languague using UTF-8
encoding. Implicit value is @code{en} for output in English.

Option @code{--encoding} enables to change inplicit UTF-8 output
encoding to iso-8859-2 (latin-2), iso-8859-2-flat (latin-2 without
diacritics), cp-1250 (MS-EE encoding) cp-12251 (Russian encoding).

Option @code{--angles} selects angular units to be used in output.

Options @code{--latitude} and/or @code{--ellipsoid} are used when
observed vertical and/or zenith angles need to be transformed into the
projection plane. If none of these two options is explicitly used, no
corrections are added to horizontal and/or zenith angles. If only one
of these options is used, then implicit value for @code{--latitude} is
45 degrees (50 gons) and implicit ellipsoid is WGS84. 
Mathematical formulas for the corrections is given in the following
section.

Adjustment results (@code{--text} and @code{--xml}) can be redirected
to standard output if instead of a file name is used "-" string. If no
output is given, XML adjustment format is implicitly send to standard
output.

Option @code{--cov-band} is used to reduce the number of computed
covariances (cofactors) in XML adjustment output. Implicitly full
matrix is written to XML output, which could degrade time efficiency
for the @code{envelope} algorithm for sparse matrix solution. Explicit
option for full covariance matrix is @code{--cov-band -1}, option
@code{--cov-band 0} means that only a diagonal of covariance matrix is
written to XML output, @code{--cov-band 1} results in computing the
main diagonal and first codiagonal etc. If higher rank is specified then
available, it is reduced do maximum possible value @code{dim-1}.


@menu
* Reductions of horizontal and zenith angles::
@end menu

@node       Reductions of horizontal and zenith angles
@subsection Reductions of horizontal and zenith angles
@cindex     reductions, horizontal and zenith angles


For evaluating of reductions of horizontal and zenith angles, 
@code{gama-local} computes a helper point @math{P_1} in the center of
the network. Horizontal and zenith angles observed at point @math{P_2}
are transformed to the projection plane perpendicular to the normal
@math{z_1} of the helper point @math{P_1}. Coordinates @math{(x_2,
y_2)} of point @math{P_2} are conserved, but its normal @math{z_2} is
rotated by the central angle @math{2\gamma_{12}} to be parallel with
@math{z_1}.

@ifnottex
Formulas for reductions of horizontal and zenith angles are given only
in the printed version.
@end ifnottex

@iftex
For observations from point @math{P_2} to point @math{P_3} we denote the zenith
angle @math{z^{m}_{23}} and horizontal direction @math{\sigma^{m}_{23}}.
Now, transformed zenith angle @math{z_{23}} and horizontal direction
@math{\sigma_{23}} can be expressed as
@tex
$$
 \cos z_{23} = \cos z^m_{23}  \cos 2\gamma_{12} +
 \sin z^m_{23} \cos (180^\circ - \sigma^m_{23})\sin \gamma_{12},
$$
$$
 \sin (180^\circ - \sigma^m_{23}) \cot \sigma_{23} = -\cos (180^\circ -
 \sigma^m_{23}) \cos 2\gamma_{12} + \cot z^m_{23}  \sin 2\gamma_{12}
$$
@end tex
@c
and after arrangement
@tex
$$
    \cos z_{23} = \cos z^m_{23} \cos 2\gamma_{12} - \sin z^m_{23} \cos
    \sigma^m_{23}\sin \gamma_{12},
$$
$$
    \cot \sigma_{23} = \cot \sigma^m_{23} \cos 2\gamma_{12} +
    {\cot z^m_{23} \sin 2\gamma_{12} \over \sin \sigma^m_{23}}
$$
@end tex

@noindent
These formulas can be simplified for small networks, roughly up to the
size of 6 kilometers, where
@c
@tex
$$
   \cos 2\gamma_{12} \approx 1 \qquad {\rm and } \qquad
 \sin 2\gamma_{12} \approx 
 {{2\gamma^{\prime\prime}_{12}}\over{\varrho^{\prime\prime}}}.
$$
@end tex

@noindent
and
@tex
$$
%  \label{eq:sftrupr1}
   \cos z_{23} = \cos z^m_{23}  - \sin z^m_{23} \cos \sigma^m_{23}
   {{2\gamma^{\prime\prime}_{12}}\over{\varrho^{\prime\prime}}}, 
$$
$$
%  \label{eq:sftrupr2}
   \cot \sigma_{23} = \cot \sigma^m_{23} +  
   {1\over{\sin^2 \sigma^m_{23}}} \cot z^m_{23}\sin \sigma^m_{23}
   {{2\gamma^{\prime\prime}_{12}}\over{\varrho^{\prime\prime}}}.
$$
@end tex

@noindent
Comparing these expressions  with first members of Taylor series
@tex
$$ 
   f(x) \approx f(x^0) +  {{{ \rm d}f(x^0)}\over{{\rm d}x}}
$$
@end tex
of functions @math{@cos z_{23}} and @math{@cot @sigma_{23}} for
@math{z_{23} = z^m_{23} + \triangle z_{23}} and
@math{ \sigma_{23} = @sigma^m_{23} + @triangle @sigma_{23} }
@c 
@tex
$$
%   \label{eq:taylorcos}
   \cos z_{23} = \cos z^m_{23}  - \sin z^m_{23} 
   {{\triangle z^{\prime\prime}_{23}}\over{\varrho^{\prime\prime}}}
$$
$$
   \cot \sigma_{23} = \cot \sigma^m_{23} -
   {{1}\over{\sin^2 \sigma^m_{23}}} 
   {{\sigma^{\prime\prime}_{23}}\over{\varrho^{\prime\prime}}},
$$
@end tex
@c
it holds that  
@math{z_{23} = @cos z^m_{23} + @triangle z^{@prime@prime}_{23}} and
@math{@sigma_{23} = cos @sigma^m_{23} + @triangle @sigma^{@prime@prime}_{23}}.



Equations for reductions of horizontal and zenith angles now can be
expressed as
@tex
$$
  z_{23} = \cos z^m_{23} + 2\gamma^{\prime\prime}_{12} \cos \sigma^{m}_{23}
$$
$$
  \sigma_{23} = \sigma^m_{23} - 2\gamma^{\prime\prime}_{12} \cot z^m_{23}
  \sin \sigma^m_{23}.
$$
@end tex

@end iftex
