@comment $Id: gama-versions.texi,v 1.3 2003/01/19 18:25:37 cepek Exp $

GNU GaMa is a project dedicated to adjustment of @emph{geodetic
networks}. It was formerly inspired by Fortran system Geodet/PC (1990)
designed by Frantisek Charamza. The GNU GaMa project has been started
at the department of mapping and cartography, faculty of Civil
Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague (CTU) about 1998 and
its name is an acronym for @emph{geodesy and mapping}.  It was
presented to wider public for the first time at FIG Working Week 2000
in Prague and then at FIG Workshop and Seminar at HUT Helsinki in
2001.

            @center   @uref{http://www.gnu.org/software/gama/}


GNU GaMa is released under GNU General Public Licence and is based on
a C++ library of geodetic classes and functions @code{GaMaLib} and a
small C++ template matrix library @code{gMatVec}. For parsing XML
documents GNU GaMa calls @code{expat} parser version 1.1 written by
James Clark. The @code{expat} parser is not part of the GNU GaMa
project, but is used with GNU GaMa.


GNU GaMa currently contains two main development branches.  Stable
branch of the project is limited to network adjustment in a local
coordinate system and its functionality is represented by a command
line program @code{gama-local}.  Program @code{gama-local} adjusts
geodetic (free) networks of observed distances, directions, angles,
height differences, 3D vectors and observed coordinates (coordinates
with given variance-covariance matrix).


In the unstable development branch the adjustment model is based on
geocentric coordinate system (adjustment model on ellipsoid). Its
functionality is going to be represented by command line program
@code{gama-g3}.  The stable branch is frozen but is being updated to
be compatible with the model of adjustment in geocentric coordinates.


Rocinante is the GNU GaMa GUI for the adjustment in local coordinate
systems (stable branch) and is based on the Qt graphical
library. Rocinante is documented separatedly, for more information see

         @center @uref{http://www.gnu.org/software/gama/rocinante/}


The latest GNU GaMa stable version can be found on in the subdirectory
@code{/gnu/gama/} on your favourite
@uref{http://www.gnu.org/prep/ftp.html, GNU mirror} or from the CVS as
the branch @code{@value{STABLEV}}.  See our project page at
@uref{http://savannah.gnu.org/projects/gama/, savannah} for more
information.  Unstable branch of GNU GaMa is available from the CVS on
the main trunk.  Archive of previous versions (both stable and
unstable) is available at
@uref{http://gama.fsv.cvut.cz/gama/archive/}.


To get an anonymous read-only access to the CVS repository for the
latest GNU GaMa unstable source, submit the following commands

@example
cvs -d:pserver:anoncvs@@subversions.gnu.org:/cvsroot/gama login
cvs -z3 -d:pserver:anoncvs@@subversions.gnu.org:/cvsroot/gama co gama
@end example

@noindent or

@example
cvs -z3 -d:pserver:anoncvs@@subversions.gnu.org:/cvsroot/gama 
         co -r @value{STABLEV} gama
@end example

@noindent for the stable branch @code{@value{STABLEV}}.



@menu
* Program @code{gama-local}::   
@end menu

@node Program @code{gama-local}
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Program @code{gama-local}

Program @code{gama-local} is a simple command line tool for adjustment
of geodetic @emph{free networks.} It is available for GNU Linux (the
main platform on which project GNU GaMa is being developped) or for MS
Windows (tested with Borland compiler from Borland free command line
tools and with Microsoft Visual C++ compiler; support for Windows
platform is currently limited to maintaing compatibility with the two
mentioned compilers).

@c ??? @code{gama-local} fails with TeX ???
@c
Program @code{gama-local} reads input data in XML format 
@ifnottex
(@ref{XML input data format for @code{gama-local}}) 
@end ifnottex
and prints adjustment
results into ASCII text file. If output file name is not given, input
file name with extension@code{.txt} is used.  If run without arguments
@code{gama-local} prints a short help

@example
bash-2.03$ ./gama-local

Adjustment of local geodetic network        version: 1.5.08 / GNU g++
************************************
http://www.gnu.org/software/gama/

Usage: gama-local [options] xml_input_file.gkf  [ output. ]

Options:

--algorithm svd|gso     
--language  en|cz|fi|du 
--version               
--help              this text

bash-2.03$
@end example

@noindent
Program @code{gama-local} version is actually the version of @code{GaMaLib}
library followed by information on compiler used to build the program
(apart from GNU @code{g++} compiler, two other possibilities are
@code{bcc} and @code{msc} for Borland and Microsoft compilers
respectively, when build under Microsoft Windows).


Option @code{--algorithm} enables to select numerical method used for
solution of the adjustment. Implicitly is used Singular Value
Decomposition (@code{svd}), alternatively user can decide for block
matrix algorithm GSO by Frantisek Charamza, based on Gram-Schmidt
ortogonalization. In either case project equations are solved directly
without forming @emph{normal equations}.

If run with option @code{--language cz}, @code{gama-local} prints output
results in Czech languague using UTF-8 encoding. Implicit value is
@code{en} for output in English.


